[preface]
Preface
-------

The goal of this book is to cover the fundamental concepts of parallel
computing, including models of computation, parallel algorithms, and
techniques for implementing and evaluating parallel algorithms.

Our primany focus will be hardware-shared memory parallelism.

For implementations, we use a Clatexmath:[++] library, called *PASL*,
which we have been developing over the past 5 years. PASL stands for
Parallel Algorithm Scheduling Library. It also sounds a bit like the
French phrase "pas seul" (pronounced "pa-sole"), meaning "not alone".

The library provides several scheduling algorithms for executing
parallel programs on modern multicores and provides a range of
utilities for inspecting the empirical behavior of parallel programs.
We expect that the instructions in this book to allow the reader to
write performant parallel programs at a relatively high level
(essentially at the same level of C++ code) without having to worry
too much about lower level details such as machine specific
optimizations, which might otherwise be necessary.

The Clatexmath:[++] examples given in this book are written to favor
simplicity of reading and therefore do not constitute good coding
examples in that language. 

All code that discussed in this book can be found at the Github
repository linked by the following URL:

https://github.com/deepsea-inria/pasl/tree/edu[https://github.com/deepsea-inria/pasl/tree/edu]

This code-base includes the examples presented in the book,  see file
`minicourse/examples.hpp`.

Some of the material in this book is based on the course,
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/\~15210/[15-210], co-taught with
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/\~guyb/[Guy Blelloch] at CMU.  
The interested reader can find more details on this material in
http://www.parallel-algorithms-book.com/[this book.]

Starting point for this book was 
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~15210/pasl.html[this book on PASL.]
